Anxiety is a natural reaction to something seen as a
perceived threat (but remember it is your own perception,
not necessarily a fact).
Some anxiety can be helpful, for it sharpens the senses and
alerts us to danger. For example:
“This road is very busy and it could be quite dangerous when
crossing, therefore I must be careful.”
In this example, we see that the anxious thought has alerted
us to caution. It becomes a problem when it is activated in
situations which are not dangerous. Anxiety only becomes a
problem when it prevents us from getting on with everyday
life and from doing the things we would like to do.
We have started to explore anxiety, its negative symptoms and
how these impact on our mood and stress levels. The previous
section of this booklet has aimed to assist in your challenging
unhelpful thoughts, with practice this is an important part of
overcoming your symptoms and distress.
This next section will help you explore strategies to introduce
to help manage your distress. It is important to understand
that as individuals we are all different and what works well for
one person may be different for another. There are no right or
wrong ways to describe anxiety as everyone experiences it very
differently - what may make one person feel afraid, nervous or
stressed may not affect another person.
3 Coping skills and strategiesWhat is Anxiety?
www.oxfordhealth.nhs.uk | Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust 17
Have you ever noticed what happens to your breathing
when you get stressed?
Your breathing pattern is affected by stress and anxiety and
you can use your breath to control your stress response, the
‘fight and flight’ mode.
You can quieten your stress response and encourage the ‘rest
and digest’ response by harnessing your breathing, focusing
on it, and slowing it down.
The practice of breathing techniques will help to lower heart
rate and blood pressure, increase digestive function and
stimulate your body to repair hormones and help to clear
your head.
Controlled breathing
Focusing on and slowing down our breathing patterns can be
found to be very helpful, particularly if feeling dizzy or light
headed when stressed or anxious.
Find yourself a comfortable position. Focus on working out a
stable breathing rhythm. Try breathing in for three seconds,
hold this for two seconds and then breathe out for three
seconds. It can be helpful to count as you do this.
There are many different breathing techniques which can help
you combat the negative symptoms.
Activity one:
Relaxation and breathing exercisesAdult Mental Health Team
18 Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust | www.oxfordhealth.nhs.uk
Muscle relaxation exercise
Find somewhere comfortable and quiet where you won’t be
interrupted. You can either sit or lie down to practice this
exercise.
Begin by focusing on your breathing. Try to have a slow and
comfortable pace. You could use the controlled breathing
technique described earlier. Do this for a few minutes to
prepare for the muscular relaxation exercise.
The main aim of this exercise is to allow your body to start to
recognise when you feel stressed and when you feel relaxed.
Try to tense each muscle group for around five seconds. Don’t
tense the muscle too tight. Focus on the sensations that this
brings. Then relax your muscles for a similar length of time,
and again, focus on how this feels. Then move onto the next
muscle group. Try to remember to keep your breathing at a
comfortable pace throughout.
Below are some suggestions of muscle groups that you may
wish to work through:
• • •
to lift something
• •
.What is Anxiety?
www.oxfordhealth.nhs.uk | Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust 19
The wrist band provide you with a tool that you can use as
a reminder for how to control your anxiety. Please note
this is not an anxiety treatment.
One of the major issues that affect those with anxiety is this
feeling that they are inside their own head. They feel like they
are so lost in thought that they cannot seem to focus on
enjoying life.
The wristband anxiety tool is designed to take you out of your
own head and snap you back into reality. It’s designed to get
you to stop over-thinking and prevent anxiety from getting
worse.
You use the technique as follows:




You can use a wrist band, rubber band or hair band. Anything
that can go on your wrists comfortably can potentially provide
the same benefits.
Activity two:
WristbandAdult Mental Health Team
20 Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust | www.oxfordhealth.nhs.uk
Distraction is a useful technique to tackle symptoms of
anxiety and stress when you feel overwhelming. This can
give you space to deal with a situation in a more
considered and positive manner. It is also helpful when
you don’t have the space or time to use a more proactive
approach, such as a relaxation exercise.
Distraction simply involves trying to take your mind off
uncomfortable symptoms or thoughts. You can do this by
trying to focus on something unrelated. Often this helps them
to pass.
Ideas to help distract you from your troubling thoughts or
anxiety include:
• • •
V
•
As with any relaxation exercise, it may take a few minutes
before you begin to feel like it’s working.
Activity three:
Distraction and MindfulnessWhat is Anxiety?
www.oxfordhealth.nhs.uk | Oxford Health NHS Fo